{{Notice|This project is in early development and actively seeking community feedback on its metrics and approach. See [[#Feedback]] below.}}

== Wikipedia Economics ==

'''Wikipedia Economics''' is a project that applies economic indicators to Wikipedia activity data. Every edit is a unit of production, every editor is a worker, every namespace is a sector of the economy. By borrowing well-understood frameworks from economics — [[w:Gross domestic product|GDP]], [[w:Labour economics|labor statistics]], [[w:Economic inequality|inequality metrics]], [[w:Quality control|quality control]] — the project offers a complementary lens on the health, resilience, and dynamics of wiki communities.

The goal is not to reduce editors to numbers, but to surface structural patterns that are difficult to see in raw activity logs: Is output concentrated in too few hands? Are newcomers being retained? Is quality control keeping pace with content production? These are questions every wiki community asks — economics provides a shared vocabulary to answer them.

=== Scope ===

The current public release is intentionally '''Wikipedia-first'''. Local onboarding currently targets supported Wikipedia language editions, starting with the yearly-partitioned projects that can be fetched cleanly from [[w:Wikipedia:Database download|Wikimedia dumps]]. Very large monthly-partitioned projects such as English Wikipedia are planned, but not part of the current onboarding path yet.

== Indicators ==

The project computes four families of indicators, each inspired by a branch of economics.

=== Edit Distribution ===

How evenly are edits distributed among editors? High concentration may signal efficiency (experienced editors are productive) or fragility (the community depends on a few individuals). Four complementary measures capture different facets of this question:

{| class="wikitable"
! Indicator !! Description
|-
| '''[[w:Gini coefficient|Gini coefficient]]''' || Measures overall edit inequality on a 0–1 scale. 0 = every editor contributes equally; 1 = one editor does everything. Wikipedia communities typically show high Gini values (0.8–0.95), reflecting the well-known pattern where a small core produces most content.
|-
| '''[[w:Theil index|Theil index]]''' || An entropy-based inequality measure. Unlike Gini, Theil is ''decomposable'': it can separate within-group and between-group inequality (e.g., across namespaces or user types).
|-
| '''[[w:Palma ratio|Palma ratio]]''' || The ratio of edits by the top 10% of editors to edits by the bottom 40%. Focuses on the extremes of the distribution rather than the middle, making it sensitive to changes in the most and least active segments.
|-
| '''Fragility (bus factor)''' || The minimum number of top editors whose combined output accounts for 50% of all edits. A low number means the wiki's output depends on very few people — a [[w:Bus factor|bus factor]] risk. Tracked both as an absolute count and as a percentage of the editor base.
|}

=== Community ===

Wikipedia's workforce can be studied like a [[w:Labour economics|labor market]]: people arrive, contribute for a time, and eventually leave. Understanding these flows helps answer whether a community is growing, shrinking, or churning.

{| class="wikitable"
! Indicator !! Description
|-
| '''Active editors''' || Count of unique contributors who made at least one edit in a given period. The most basic measure of community size.
|-
| '''Arrivals''' || Editors whose first recorded edit falls within the period. Measures the inflow of new contributors.
|-
| '''Departures''' || Editors who were active in the previous period but not in the current one. Measures attrition.
|-
| '''Arrival & departure rates''' || Arrivals (or departures) divided by active editors. Normalizes flows relative to community size, making wikis of different sizes comparable.
|-
| '''Cohort retention''' || For each yearly cohort (editors who made their first edit in year ''Y''), tracks what fraction remain active in subsequent years. Reveals whether a wiki retains its newcomers or loses them quickly.
|-
| '''User type breakdown''' || Splits the workforce into registered editors, anonymous (IP) editors, temporary accounts, and bots. Each group has different behaviors, motivations, and policy implications.
|}

=== Content Production ===

In national economics, [[w:Gross domestic product|GDP]] measures the total value of goods and services produced. On Wikipedia, '''output''' is the content produced by editors, measured in bytes and edits.

{| class="wikitable"
! Indicator !! Description
|-
| '''Gross output''' || Total bytes added across all edits. Counts every byte contributed, regardless of whether it survives.
|-
| '''Net output''' || Bytes added minus bytes removed. What actually remains in the encyclopedia — the closest analogue to GDP.
|-
| '''Content churn''' || The gap between gross and net output. High churn means a large share of work is undone by reverts, deletions, or rework.
|-
| '''Revert rate''' || Fraction of edits that are [[w:Wikipedia:Reverting|identity-reverted]]. A proxy for unproductive or contested labor.
|-
| '''Productivity''' || Net bytes per edit. Measures how much lasting content each edit produces on average.
|-
| '''Productivity per capita''' || Net bytes per active editor. The wiki equivalent of [[w:GDP per capita|GDP per capita]].
|-
| '''Activity tiers''' || Editors grouped by monthly edit count (1, 2–4, 5–24, 25–99, 100+). Shows how output and editor counts distribute across levels of engagement.
|-
| '''Sectoral output''' || Breakdown by [[w:Wikipedia:Namespace|namespace]] (article, talk, user, project, template, etc.). Each namespace is an economic ''sector'' with different dynamics.
|-
| '''User type share''' || Percentage of total edits contributed by registered editors, anonymous editors, temporary accounts, and bots. Tracks how the composition of the workforce evolves.
|}

=== Patrol ===

[[w:Wikipedia:Patrolled edit|Patrolling]] is Wikipedia's quality-control mechanism: experienced editors review new edits and pages to catch vandalism, errors, and policy violations. These indicators measure whether the community's "immune system" is keeping up.

{| class="wikitable"
! Indicator !! Description
|-
| '''Patrol volume''' || Total number of patrol actions per period, split between new-page patrols and diff (edit) patrols.
|-
| '''Unique patrollers''' || Count of distinct editors who performed at least one patrol action. Measures the size of the quality-control workforce.
|-
| '''Patrol coverage''' || Percentage of revisions that were manually patrolled. Low coverage means edits go unreviewed.
|-
| '''Adjusted coverage''' || Includes revisions that were [[w:Wikipedia:Autopatrolled|autopatrolled]] (automatically marked as reviewed for trusted editors). Gives a fuller picture of how much content is effectively reviewed.
|-
| '''Patrol latency''' || Median and 90th-percentile time (in hours) between an edit being created and being patrolled. Measures how quickly the community responds.
|-
| '''Patroller concentration''' || The minimum number of patrollers needed to account for 50% of all patrol actions — a fragility measure for the quality-control function, analogous to the edit distribution bus factor.
|}

All patrol indicators can be filtered by the '''author type''' of the patrolled edit (registered, anonymous, temporary, bot). This enables analysis such as: "Do anonymous edits get patrolled faster than registered ones?"

== Data sources ==

The project consumes publicly available Wikimedia data:

# '''[[w:Wikipedia:Database download#MediaWiki history dumps|MediaWiki History dumps]]''' — the primary data source. These TSV files contain one row per revision event with 76 columns covering editor metadata, page state, and revision details. The project filters to revision-creation events and retains 10 analytical columns.
# '''[[w:Wikipedia:Database download#Pages logging|MediaWiki logging dumps]]''' — XML dumps of the <code>logging</code> table, used specifically for patrol events (<code>log_type=patrol</code>) and user-rights changes (to determine autopatrol membership).

No private data, [[w:CheckUser|CheckUser]] information, or non-public APIs are used. All inputs are available to anyone from [https://dumps.wikimedia.org/ dumps.wikimedia.org].

== Technical overview ==

The pipeline has four stages:

# '''Fetch''' — downloads dumps from Wikimedia, streaming to disk without buffering entire files in memory. Supports resume for interrupted downloads.
# '''Ingest''' — converts raw TSV dumps into [[w:Apache Parquet|Parquet]] files, filtering to revision-creation events and normalizing columns. Produces a compact analytical layer (~10 columns) suitable for fast aggregation.
# '''Compute''' — reads Parquet partitions one month at a time and produces per-wiki metric files. Most metrics are computed independently per month; only cohort tracking and churn rates require cross-month state.
# '''Merge''' — concatenates per-wiki outputs into combined Parquet files for cross-wiki analysis.

The compute engine is written in [[w:Rust (programming language)|Rust]] using [[w:Polars (software)|Polars]] for dataframe operations. Patrol metrics use a [[w:Python (programming language)|Python]] pipeline. The interactive dashboard is built with [https://observablehq.com/framework/ Observable Framework] and uses [[w:DuckDB|DuckDB]] compiled to [[w:WebAssembly|WebAssembly]] for client-side queries directly on Parquet files.

=== Filtering dimensions ===

All indicators support consistent filtering by:

* '''Wiki''' — any processed Wikipedia language edition
* '''User type''' — registered, anonymous, temporary, bot (classification follows [[w:MediaWiki|MediaWiki]]'s own flags)
* '''Namespace''' — any [[w:Wikipedia:Namespace|MediaWiki namespace]] present in the data
* '''Time range''' — arbitrary start/end month (YYYY-MM)
* '''Granularity''' — month, quarter, or year aggregation

== Why "economics"? ==

The economic metaphor is not decorative. Each indicator family maps to a real branch of economics:

* '''Edit Distribution''' ← [[w:Economic inequality|inequality economics]] (Gini, Theil, Palma are standard measures used by the World Bank and OECD)
* '''Community''' ← [[w:Labour economics|labor economics]] (arrival/departure rates, cohort analysis, workforce composition)
* '''Content Production''' ← [[w:National accounts|national accounting]] (gross vs. net output, productivity, sectoral breakdown)
* '''Patrol''' ← [[w:Regulatory economics|regulatory economics]] / quality inspection (coverage rates, response times, inspector concentration)

This framing provides two advantages: (1) the metrics are well-defined and peer-reviewed in the economics literature, avoiding ad-hoc definitions; (2) they are immediately legible to anyone familiar with economic reporting, which includes most policy-makers and institutional stakeholders.

== Current status ==

This project is in '''early development'''. The pipeline runs, the dashboard is functional, and the core indicators are computed. However:

* The metric definitions would benefit from community review — are they measuring the right things? Are there edge cases specific to wiki communities that the standard economic definitions miss?
* The indicator set is not final. Additional metrics may be added, and existing ones may be refined based on feedback.
* Cross-wiki validation is ongoing across Wikipedia language editions, and the onboarding path is being widened incrementally rather than claiming Wikimedia-wide support up front.

== Feedback ==

This project is explicitly seeking feedback from the Wikimedia community. Areas where input is especially valuable:

* '''Metric relevance''' — Which indicators are most useful for your community? Which are missing?
* '''Metric definitions''' — Do the economic analogies hold? Where do wiki-specific dynamics break the metaphor?
* '''Interpretation''' — What contextual knowledge would help interpret the numbers? (e.g., known bot campaigns, policy changes, content drives that create spikes)
* '''Naming''' — Are the indicator names clear and appropriate for a volunteer community?

Please leave feedback on the [[{{TALKPAGENAME}}|talk page]].

== See also ==

* [[w:Wikipedia:Statistics|Wikipedia:Statistics]]
* [[w:Wikipedia:Wikimedia in figures|Wikimedia in figures]]
* [[m:Research:Index|Wikimedia Research]]
* [[w:Wikipedia:Database download|Database downloads]]

[[Category:Wikimedia research]]
[[Category:Wikipedia statistics]]
